## TeXShop and Encodings

From the README for the update to v. 3.15 of TeXShop:

 > The default encoding in TeXShop has been changed from MacOSRoman to ISOLatin9. This will not affect old users except at one minor spot.
 > 
 > To understand the change, recall a few encoding basics. A computer file is just a long sequence of bytes, each an integer between 0 and 255. Other data, including picture data and sound data, is encoded in this form when written to disk. The majority of computer files contain ordinary text.. Text was originally encoded in Ascii format, which assigns a byte to each key on an American typewriter; Ascii only uses the first 127 bytes, so the bytes from 128 to 255 are available for other purposes. The Ascii encoding was later extended for use in Europe and elsewhere by adding accents, umlauts, and other characters to the upper 128 vacent spots. Many such encodings were invented, and a number of them are available in TeXShop. ISO Latin 9 is such an encoding. It encodes ascii characters in the first 128 positions, and all symbols commonly used in Western Europe in the upper 128 positions. ISO Latin 9 is essentially the same as the earlier ISO Latin 1, except that it includes the Euro currency symbol.
 >
 >Eventually, the computer industry invented Unicode, which is theoretically capable of handling the symbols used in all of the world's languages. Internally, TeXShop and other Mac OS X programs represent and process text in Unicode. There is no standard Unicode encoding for writing to disk, so all Apple routines which read text from disk or write text to disk require an extra parameter listing the encoding to be used. A commonly used encoding for Unicode is UTF-8. It has the advantage that ordinary ascii files are legal UTF-8 files. The disadvantage of UTF-8 is that random collections of bytes may do not contain legal UTF-8 code, so when the computer tries to open a file in UTF-8 which was written in another encoding, the computer sees garbage and returns nil. Encodings which extend ascii by adding symbols to the upper 128 places do not have this problem; if a file written with one such encoding is opened with a different encoding, the computer will not complain, but some symbols may appear with unexpected shapes.
 >
 >TeXShop must deal with this design in two spots. When TeXShop is asked to open a file, it reads the first few bytes in MacOSRoman to check whether a "% !TEX encoding = ..." statement is at the top of the file. It now reads these bytes in ISOLatin9. And when TeXShop opens a file in UTF-8, but receives a report that the file does not contain legal UTF-8 code, is used to reopen the file in MacOSRoman encoding and now opens it in ISOLatin9.
 >
 >Some users have requested that TeXShop's default encoding be UTF-8. Users can achieve this result by simply switching the default encoding to UTF-8 in TeXShop Preferences. UTF-8 is not the current default because I believe that many users have old files which were written with Ascii or some other earlier encoding. If these files contain straight ascii, they work fine as UTF-8 files. But if by chance a stray non-ascii character was entered by mistake, then users will see a mysterious dialog panic when  TeXShop reports that the file cannot open in UTF-8.

[end]
